Captioning sponsored
by PUBLIC AFFAIRS TELEVISION
MOYERS:
For 20 years now,
the artist and architect
Maya Lin has produced
a stunning body of work:
sculpture, earthworks,
memorials,
interiors, buildings.
Her designs blend
the aesthetics of East and West
into a reverence for nature
and the evocation
of our human relationship
with our environment.
Born in Athens, Ohio,
Maya Lin was an undergraduate
at Yale University in 1981,
when she won
the international competition
to design the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial in Washington, D.C.
The choice hurled her into
the storm of the controversy
over the simplicity
of her design
and over her own ethnicity.
T!
and today her work stands
as one of the great
public monuments of America.
I met Maya Lin recently
after reading her book,
Boundaries,
and asked her about
how she came to design
the Civil Rights Memorial
in Montgomery, Alabama.
LIN:
I got a phone call
from the Southern Poverty
Law Center,
and they asked me
over the phone,
you know,
"Would you be interested
in designing
a civil rights memorial?"
And I thought,
"Well, isn't there one already?"
And he said,
"No, no, no, there isn't.
"There's one for Martin
Luther King, but actually,
"no one has really tackled
the Civil Rights Memorial
"as a piece.
Would you be interested?"
And I had two feelings
at the time.
One, I really did not want to be
typecast as a memorial designer.
Two, I could not believe
that there hadn't been a
national civil rights memorial.
And so I asked them
to send me materials.
I was stunned
at how there was this part
of American history that, say...
and I know now it's absolutely
covered in textbooks,
but could I offer something out
as an information table
that would give people
a brief glimpse of that era
the way I had been...
sort of after having
looked at this material
been given a glimpse?
And of course, the idea is
you look at this,
you'll want to study it more,
because the one thing
about sculptures,
the one thing about memorials is
I can draw you in.
I can make you think
for 15 minutes, whatever,
then it's really about
where you go after that.
It starts with the 1954
Brown v. Board of Education.
You walk around clockwise,
it chronicles the history,
people's deaths,
legislative events.
It was a sort
of cause and effect--
sometimes a person's action
led to better legislation,
sometimes legislation led
to a riot and someone's death.
But what I wanted to stress here
is this was a people's movement,
and one person's actions
could really change history.
Because I think in the end,
a lot of my works deal
with history and teaching.
It's not so much about death;
it's really
about sharing a history
so that we don't forget it,
so we can improve upon it.
( water running softly )
MOYERS:
Where did the water come from,
the idea of the water?
LIN:
The water was literally
on my first plane ride
down to see the site.
I came across
Martin Luther King's quote
from the Book of Amos
in his "I have a dream" speech:
"We are not satisfied.
"We shall not be satisfied
"until justice rolls down
like waters
and righteousness
like a mighty stream."
I knew right then and there,
before the plane even landed,
the piece was going to be
about water.
And what bothered me
about going down thinking
about the past in this one
is that it's not done.
It's not a closed timeline.
It's ongoing.
What the Southern Poverty Law
Center is struggling with
is the ongoing, is the future.
So I needed something
to connect the past
which would be the history,
which became the water table
with the talk about the future,
which is the quote.
And then the water pulls them
together symbolically.
One of my favorite pieces is
a piece called Wave Field.
It's on the University
of Michigan north campus,
and the building surrounding it
teaches aerospace
and engineering,
so, of course,
being site-specific,
I wanted to connect it
to what was going on
behind the building.
So I started talking
to the scientists,
talking to the professors.
They started giving me books
on aerodynamics, fluid dynamics.
And one of the books,
I came across this
repetitive water wave,
and I said, "That's the piece."
Now, of course, I presented it
to the engineers,
and they were going,
"Well, that belongs
"over in naval engineering.
It doesn't belong over here."
MOYERS:
Makes me want
to lie down there.
LIN:
And kids do...
Really?
Until the sprinklers come up.
I'm beginning to understand
the last line of your book,
where you say,
"Maybe I'm just asking you
to pay closer attention
to the land..."
Yeah. Definitely.
"Whether the land is
a cemetery
or a sports
coliseum."
Right.
Or in the middle of nowhere.
Where did this come from,
this intrigue about the land?
Growing up, southeastern Ohio--
it's very hilly,
very rural, beautiful.
When I was growing up,
we were going through
a very large campaign...
I think Rachel Carson
had put out Silent Spring.
Lake Erie was catching on fire.
DDT was decimating
bird populations.
I think at a very,
very early age,
I understood what it means
to have a species go extinct.
I was horrified
that one species could do
this to another species.
And I think
what my work is about
is about appreciating and
being respectful of nature,
which, again, ties in
to an inherent love
for the natural environment.
I will go to sites that are just
so beautiful beyond compare,
and I know that nothing I do
can ever be better.
My favorite line from your book
comes very close to the end,
where you write,
"I do not think
you can find a reason
for everything
you make."
Talk to me about that.
Everything you make is being
made by every single experience
you've ever had
in your whole life.
On top of that, things you were
born with, just, you know,
I think...
your personality comes out.
There's no way
of really saying, I...
it's like "If A, then B"
or "A plus B equals C"
in creativity.
And I think the true strength
of the creative arts
is that you allow yourself
to think about something,
and then how it finds its way
in your mind
to the surface
through your hands to...
whether it's paint, sculpture...
I mean, others
outside the creative
might say it's intuited.
I mean, I think
there's reason to it,
but could you extrapolate?
Could you actually formulate
a mathematical theorem?
Absolutely not.
You couldn't put a pin
on a map of an idea.
No, you could never do
that, nor would you want
to do that.
Somewhere I read
that an idea comes to you
like an egg.
Yeah.
Then the
question is,
where does it get hatched?
You know, I've never
thought about that.
It's sort of the idea
of being...
I will... I can work
on a project for three years,
but you'll never see me
working on it.
I'll be designing other things,
doing other this...
Generally, the first concept,
the initial idea,
I can just wake up one morning--
after having not worked on it
for a year--
get up, do a sketch,
make a model,
and I know that's
what it is.
I'll sit down and
I'll just write
what I want to say here,
what needs to be said,
how to do it.
And I try not to second-guess it
by finding a form
and then trying to apply meaning
or function to the form,
because then you're
trying to make...
if you have
the preconceived idea
of what you think it looks like
before you really
shape it verbally,
then you're trying
to stuff function
into a pre-existing form.
So, I think what I love doing
in a lot of my works
is I like to write about it,
because you can get
a conceptual sketch
of what you think you want
without any form.
And then usually
the form finds me.
Tell me about your
family background.
LIN:
My mother was born in Shanghai;
my father, Fukien and Beijing--
he grew up in both places.
And they immigrated separately
to the States.
They both ostensibly came out
because of the
communist takeover.
My mother came out on
a scholarship to go to Smith.
She got smuggled out on
a junk boat in Shanghai harbor
when the communists... when
the harbor was being bombed...
That was 1949.
That would
have been '49.
Imagine you get sent out
with, I think, $50 sewn
into the neck of her coat,
with a suitcase, never to see
your family ever again,
never to see your country
until, you know, 30, 40...
you know, 40 years later.
I don't know
how they both did it.
My father had a career in China.
He was an academic
administrator.
And he came out midcareer,
decided that he would never get
a comparable position in America
because he was Chinese,
so at the age...
you know, I think late 30s
decided to study ceramics.
Goes to University
of Washington, takes up pottery.
My father was brought up
fairly strictly.
He wasn't allowed
to go into art in China.
And there he was,
finally being able to get to do
what he wanted to do in America.
But I think, again, the side of
the Chinese-American experience
which is arts-based,
scholar-based, education-based
is almost the... it's a
different side, and I think...
To the science
and the engineering?
Exactly.
And I think with it came
this unusual psyche
that we're not going
to force Tan or Maya
to do anything
they don't want to do.
What were your parents'
expectations of you?
Education was key;
you had to study.
But, again, we were never
forced to study,
we sort of did it on our own.
I think there was
always an assumption
that our education was
what mattered.
You could have done science,
you were good in science,
you were good in math, you...
I happen to know you were
first in your class.
You could have become anything.
You chose to be
an artist.
The funny thing is there were
two sides growing up.
There was a very academic...
this love of academia.
I mean, books everywhere,
just...
My mother was a professor--
English professor,
Asian lit. professor.
And I think that was
what we assumed...
we're going to study,
study, study.
Meanwhile, my brother and I go
into my dad's ceramic studio
every day after school,
throwing clay at the clock
to cover it up--
drove my dad crazy.
I took it for granted.
Every day of my life,
I was making something.
I never thought
I would be an artist,
because in a weird way...
Oh, I was going to... I had
to get my doctorate, you know.
Everyone... We go, "We've
got to get our Ph.D.s."
I mean that was sort of what
I assumed would happen.
And so it's almost like,
oh, the bookish side
was technically supposed
to win out, right?
But ironically, you know,
I chose architecture, in a way,
because I thought it was
this perfect combination
of science, math and art.
But the weird thing is
even though I love building
buildings, I'm an artist.
I've been an artist
from probably the first time
I stepped into my dad's
ceramic studio.
Your home was full of ideas,
it was full of art
and full of living.
Yeah, and I think
that's the other side
of the Chinese culture.
How so?
It was always
"As long as you're happy."
It wasn't, like, "In order
for you to be happy,
you should do
this, this and this."
You don't have to be
a scientist.
But that flies in the face
of the cliché
about Americans
of Chinese descent,
because we're told
over and over again,
"My mother and father said
I had to be a scientist,"
"I had to become a doctor,"
"I had to go
to graduate school."
I mean, I think
my brother and I had
a really good giggle
about, you know, ten years ago,
you know,
a poet and a sculptor--
technically
not great professions
in which to feed yourself.
And we were joking,
"Gee, maybe Mom and Dad
should have made us worry
about, you know,
the realities of life."
But they were really
firmly believing
that we had
to kind of... grow here,
and that was
what was really important.
You had to... you had to pursue
something that you really
had a passion for.
Did you fit in in Athens?
Did anybody ever make you feel
uncomfortable there?
I was
so miserable
by the time
I got to high school,
and so I had pretty much
retreated into my own world.
Miserable because?
I was really out of place
and didn't understand
why was out of place.
I mean, it seems so obvious.
But if you're going through it,
you don't have a clue.
I was... you know,
I was, you know...
if I look back, I was probably
an incredible, um...
you know, misfit.
I had friends, but it was...
it wasn't like I belonged.
And I didn't...
I didn't want to date.
I didn't...
I just wanted to study.
I loved to study.
I had a really
hard time
with my identity.
And I think...
How so?
I really was in denial
about being Chinese American.
I wanted to fit in,
I wanted to be American.
And I think for the first
20 years of my life
I really... I remember
when I was at Yale,
like, I was try...
you know, you were recruited
by the Asian-American
society, AASA,
and I was so uncomfortable.
I was foreign in that group.
I was the only...
If you think about it,
I was the only Chinese American
growing up,
so I looked out at everyone,
and everyone is white.
So what would make me
more uncomfortable is...
and it...
so it was this horrible...
What would make you
more uncomfortable?
Hanging out with... a group
of Chinese Americans--
and I knew that this was bad,
but at the same time...
You mean, feeling bad...
Feeling bad,
like, "What is
wrong with you?
You're Chinese American."
And... and I remember
just politely declining
becoming part of...
of AASA at the time.
And it's taken me my next
20 years to really understand.
And what is ironic is
my work is so much inspired
as much by, I would say,
an Eastern sensibility,
and that's coming from my father
and probably my mother.
My mother
was a writer.
So, even though
they didn't set you down
and talk about your Chinese
heritage or Asian heritage,
they lived their heritage
in such a way
that it was
naturally imparted?
Absolutely, I think.
I mean, that's the only way
I can reason it.
Was there a moment of awareness,
a moment when you had to claim
your Chineseness?
I think
technically
not until my late 20s
did I really begin to see,
as my body of work
began to grow,
how my voice is a voice
that is very much coming out
of bicultural experience.
And I think it's my art that
kind of guided me to see it.
It was never, like,
an intellectual...
like, "Oh, my work
is going to be
about
my Asian-American identity."
It was more like I just
make work, this is what I do.
And then I look back
and I go, "Oh, I get it."
And is that
Eastern sensibility--
is that a preference, a taste
for simplicity, for the natural,
for connecting to the flow
of the earth, the harmony of...?
I think so,
and yet the funny thing is
I've never read
about Taoist thought,
I've never read about Zen.
Again, it's always
like I don't want to...
I don't want
to make it conscious.
If you look at any
of the works that I do,
I'm very much against sort of
a didactic, teaching method,
where you come in and I tell you
exactly what you should be
getting out of this piece.
Everything that I do
will be about...
I will put this out here,
and it's up to you to come
to your own conclusions.
That's
very Taoist.
And that's
so Taoist--
never trained.
And I think what's so funny
is I got into so much trouble.
And I think the main flak
with the Vietnam memorial came
after the Washington Post--
great headline: "An Asian
Memorial for an Asian War."
It was written by a journalist
who happened
to really know Taoism.
And he was going crazy, because
he was looking at this work
and going, "It is so Taoist,"
talking to me,
and I'm, like, going,
"I... I don't know
anything about that."
But, of course, it's all there
because my parents--
the way we lived.
Think about it, um--
they never told us what to do,
they never tried to, like,
ever say, "You can't do this."
I mean, it was
a very unusual upbringing.
Would you read this?
This is from...
This is from, um...
describing...
the design of
the Vietnam memorial:
"I had a simple impulse
to cut into the earth.
"I imagined taking a knife
and cutting into the earth,
"opening it up,
"an initial violence and pain
that in time would heal.
"The grass would grow back,
"but the initial cut would
remain a pure, flat surface.
"There was no need to embellish
the design further.
"The people and their names
would allow everyone
"to respond and remember.
"It would be an interface
between our world
and the quieter, darker,
more peaceful world beyond."
Where did that impulse to cut
into the earth come from?
What I was studying
for the three months leading up
to the design of the memorial
was this funereal class.
One of
the problems was
design a memorial
to World War III.
One was design like a funeral...
like a cemetery cherub
or something.
And so I had been
thinking about--
when I was designing a memorial
to World War III--
what is the nature
of a memorial?
And I studied
World War I memorials.
I went back to Trajan's Column.
So again, research-- studied
something for a couple months,
put it all away,
went to visit the site.
No thinking,
just had an impulse.
You didn't think metaphorically
about how the Vietnam War
had cut a great gash
in the psyche of this country?
No.
And see, the...
I'm so naive that way
that especially when...
because I was, like, "Oh, yeah,
it's like cutting open the earth
and opening it up,"
and everyone said, "Scar?"
And the minute you say "scar"
in the media,
it's, like,
"We don't want a scar."
The other thing
they read into
is that it's a "V" for victory.
And I kept going,
"Well, if you tried to do that
"as big as the memorial,
you'd break your fingers.
It's really not that."
And the third one was
they read into the image
the color, black,
as being, again,
a very negative statement.
Well, it was not only political,
Maya Lin,
it was... it was personal.
I mean, the most vicious
and venomous things
were said about you.
You were called a gook.
You were called,
you know...
making a tribute to Jane Fonda.
I had no idea that there
was a problem with my race.
And I was so naive
that I remember at the very
first press conference,
some reporter said,
"Don't you think it's ironic
"that the memorial is
the Vietnam memorial
and you're of Asian descent?"
And I looked at him, and I was,
like, "Well, that's irrelevant.
"You know, this is America.
That's irrelevant."
Because I was brought up
in a very rarefied world
where what mattered
was what you thought.
It's academia,
it's what you're thinking,
and your gender didn't matter,
your age didn't matter,
your race didn't matter.
And I knew
I was right,
and once it was up,
they would get it.
Well, how were you
so sure of that?
Because
I just knew.
When you're so young,
what do you have going for you?
Total belief
in what you've done.
There was no doubt.
I think as you get older, we...
we all begin to have doubts.
I think when you're 20 years
old, you... you're right.
What fascinates
me is
how I was never afraid
that it wouldn't work,
whereas I think now,
absolutely, you'd be terrified.
You'd be thinking, "Oh, my God,
what if they're right
and I'm wrong?"
You don't have that
when you're
that age.
I mean, but here
they were calling...
one of your competitors
called it an "open urinal..."
That one
I didn't see.
You didn't
see that?
No.
Right-wingers called it
an "Orwellian..."
"Glop."
I love that one.
I think that critic actually...
What I thought was fascinating
is after it was built,
the letters I got from...
I think, the critic
of "Orwellian glop"--
because I remember that one--
actually wrote
a letter to apologize.
Of course, the... the bigotry
and the hatred and the racism
did not have the last word.
The monument is the last word.
Yeah.
It is.
And people who visit it
are visibly moved.
I go there many times,
and I never go there
without being moved myself
and without seeing everyone
who is passing by deeply moved.
Why do you think
they are so moved by it?
I think because it's tapping
into some very important,
I would say ancient needs.
I think fundamentally, um...
when I was designing it,
I thought
about the nature of death
and acknowledging
death.
It's extraordinary to watch
people touch the names.
It's as if something
were passing
back and forth
between the name
and the touch.
And there's something very quiet
and very intimate.
I didn't grasp the pow... why
it was so powerful to be there
until I actually read
the sentence from your essay
where you say,
looking at that black marble,
"It would be an interface
between our world
and the quieter, darker,
more peaceful world beyond."
LIN:
Right.
And it's a world we can't enter,
because we can't pass
through those names.
And it's painful.
But again, I mean...
And I had not known
anyone who had died.
I just had a feeling
that it's got to be
the most painful, um, experience
that you will ever go through.
But what you have is the memory.
And you have to accept it,
and then you have to turn around
and walk back into the light.
But if you don't accept it,
you'll never get over it.
Maya Lin,
thank you very much.
Oh, you're welcome.